docs: document describing how to update symbols map files + bugfix in the symbols generator for major versioning (#3458)
canonical/mir: doc/sphinx/how-to/how-to-update-symbols-map.md

5. Check that your symbols are reflected properly in the `symbols.map` file:
   ```sh
   git diff src/miral/symbols.map
   ```
6. Regenerate the debian symbols:
   ```sh
   cmake --build build --target regenerate-miral-debian-symbols
   ```

## How to update miroil symbols

### Scenario 1: Adding a new symbol
1. Make the additive change to the interface (e.g. by adding a new method
   to an existing class)
2. If not already bumped in this release cycle, bump `MIROIL_VERSION_MINOR`
   in `src/miroil/CMakeLists.txt`
3. If not already bumped in this release cycle, bump `MIROIL_ABI` in 
   `src/miroil/CMakeLists.txt`
4. From the root of the project, run:
   ```sh
   cmake --build build --target generate-miroil-symbols-map
   ```
5. Check that your new symbols is in the `symbols.map` file:
   ```sh
   git diff src/miroil/symbols.map
   ```

### Scenario 2: Removing or changing a symbol
1. Make a destructive change to the interface (e.g. remove a parameter from
   a method).
2. If not already bumped in this release cycle, bump `MIROIL_ABI``
   in `src/miroil/CMakeLists.txt`. Set `MIROIL_VERSION_MINOR` and `MIROIL_VERSION_PATCH`
   to `0`
3. From the root of the project, run:
   ```sh

>    cmake --build build --target generate-miral-symbols-map

Reviewer: miroil?

# How to Update Symbols Map Files
The Mir project is a collection of C++ libraries that a consumer
can use to create a Wayland compositor. In order for consumers
of Mir's libraries to be confident in what they're building against, the
symbols of each library are versioned.

To describe these versions, each user-facing library defines a `symbols.map`
file. These files are comprised of version stanzas which contain the symbols
associated with that version. There are `symbols.map` files for the following
libraries, although only the first three are typically used in practice:

- [miral](#how-to-update-miral-symbols)
- [miroil](#how-to-update-miroil-symbols)
- [mirserver](#how-to-update-mirserver-symbols-map)
- mircore
- mircommon
- mirplatform
- mirwayland

It is tedious to edit these files. Luckily for us, this versioning business
is (mostly) automated so that we have to think very little about it.

## When are symbols.map files updated
Two different circumstances will prompt a developer to update
these files:

> 1. **A new symbols is added to a library**

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
1. **A new symbol is added to a library**
```
or
```suggestion
1. **New symbols are added to a library**
```

    This means that we have extended the existing interface.
    The new symbols can simply be put in a new stanza with a "bumped"
    minor version. Note that the minor version must only be bumped once
    per release cycle. This means that if I add a new symbol two months
    before a release and you add a symbol 1 day before the release, then
    our new symbols will go in the same stanza. In that situation, I
    would have been the one to create the new stanza.

2. **A symbol is changed or removed** (e.g. a new parameter is
   added to a method call, a class is removed, etc.)

    This is an API break. This means that a consumer of the library
    can no longer safely compile against the new version of that library
    without maybe breaking their build. In this scenario, we are forced
    to create a single new stanza at a brand new version in the `symbols.map`
    file. This new stanza will contain all of the symbols in that library.

> Sometimes we break a symbols but don't even realize it until someone

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Sometimes we change a symbol but don't even realize it until someone
```

points it out in a pull request. Nowadays, the symbols check is automated
by CI. You can find results of this check
[here](https://github.com/canonical/mir/actions/workflows/symbols-check.yml).
This check is run on each pull request. It will inform you whether or not
a `symbols.map` file needs to be updated due to your change.

> **Warning**: This check is not sophisticated to know if you change the

Reviewer 2: I can't quite parse what you're trying to say here

Author: Updated! let me know if it reads better to you now

Reviewer 2: Crystal clear now :+1:

```sh
sudo apt install clang-19
```

Afterwards, you will want to set the following environment variables to point
at the path of `libclang.so` and `libclang.so`'s `lib` directory. Note that
these paths are likely to be the same on most Ubuntu 24.04 setups, but may
vary on other distros:

```sh
export MIR_SYMBOLS_MAP_GENERATOR_CLANG_SO_PATH=/usr/lib/llvm-19/lib/libclang.so.1
export MIR_SYMBOLS_MAP_GENERATOR_CLANG_LIBRARY_PATH=/usr/lib/llvm-19/lib
```

It is recommended that you put those `export ...` commands in your `.bashrc`
so that you don't have to think about it in the future.

And that's it! Now we are ready to update our symbols automatically.

## How to update miral symbols

### Scenario 1: Adding a new symbol
1. Make the additive change to the interface (e.g. by adding a new method
   to an existing class)
2. If not already bumped in this release cycle, bump `MIRAL_VERSION_MINOR`
   in `src/CMakeLists.txt`
3. From the root of the project, run:
   ```sh
   cmake --build build --target generate-miral-symbols-map
   ```
4. Check that your new symbols is in the `symbols.map` file:
   ```sh
   git diff src/miral/symbols.map
   ```
5. Regenerate the debian symbols:
   ```sh

>    cmake --build build --target regenerate-miral-debian-symbols

Author: Done!
